## Materials and Methods

### Lineage tree-based hidden Markov model

The core assumption of a Markov chain is that the next state and current observation are only dependent on the current state. Proof of many of the expressions below can be found in Durand et al [@doi:10.1109/TSP.2004.832006]. The tHMM is composed of several intermediate steps to carry out predictions and estimations.

#### Basic model structure

The initial probabilities of a cell being in state $k$ are represented by the vector $\pi$ that sums to 1:  
$$\pi_k = P(z_1 = k), \qquad k \in \{1, ..., K\}$$  
where $z$ shows the states and $K$ is the total number of states. The probability of state $i$ transitioning to state $j$ is represented by the $K \times K$ matrix, $T$, in which each row sums to 1:   
$$T_{i,j} = T(z_i \rightarrow z_j) = P(z_j \;| z_i), \qquad i,j \in \{1, ..., K\}$$  
The emission likelihood matrix, $EL$, is based on the cell observations. It is defined as the probability of an observation conditioned on the cell being in a specific state:  
$$EL(n,k) = P(x_n = x | z_n = k)$$
where $x_n$ shows the cell number $n$, with a total of N cells in a lineage.
Separate observations were assumed to be independent; for instance, cell fate is considered to be independent from the time duration of each cell phase. This faciliatates calculating the likelihood of observations, such that we multiply the likelihood of all observations together for the total likelihood. Since the hidden states are unobserved, we need an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm, in this case we call it Baum-Welch algorithm, to find the states and their specifications. EM algorithm consists of two steps: (1) the expectation step (E-step) and (2) maximization step (M-step.) In the E-step, given the whole lineage tree the probability of a cell and its parent being in specific states are calculated, such that for every cell and every state we have $P(z_n = k \;| X_n) \label{E1}$ and $P(z_n = k,\; z_{n+1} = l \; | X_n) \label{E2}$. The E-step is calculated by the upward and downward recursion algorithms.

In the M-step, distribution parameters of each state and hyper parameters such as the initial ($\pi$) and transition probability ($T$) matrices are calculated, given the estimated states of each cell. In each run, we switch between the E-step and the M-step and calculate the likelihood. If the likelihood stops improving, the process stops and exists the algorithm, which means convergence has been reached. The following explains each step in detail.

#### E-step
##### Upward recursion

An _upward-downward_ algorithm for calculating the probabilities in hidden Markov chains (HMCs) was previously proposed by Erphaim and Merhav [@doi:10.1109/TIT.2002.1003838] which suffered from the underflow problem. This problem was originally solved by Levinson [doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1983.tb03114.x] for HMCs, where they adopted a heuristic based scaling, and then was upgraded by Devijver et al., [doi:10.1016/0167-8655(85)90023-6] where they introduced smooth probabilities. Durand et al., [@doi:10.1109/TSP.2004.832006] however, revised this approach for hidden Markov trees to avoid underflow when calculating $P(Z|X)$ probability matrices. To explain that, we need to know the following definitions:

- $p(n)$ is noted as the parent cell of the cell $n$, and $c(n)$ is noted as children of cell $n$.
- $\bar{X}$ is the observation of the whole tree and $\bar{X}_a$ is a subtree of $\bar{X}$ which is rooted at cell $a$.
- $\bar{Z}$ is the complete hidden state tree.
- $\bar{X}_{a/b}$ is the subtree rooted at $a$ except for the subtree rooted at cell $b$, if $\bar{X}_b$ is a subtree of $\bar{X}_a$.

For the state prediction we start by calculating the marginal state distribution (MSD) matrix. MSD is an $N \times K$ matrix that for each cell is marginalizing the transition probability over all possible current states by traversing from root to leaf cells:  
$$MSD(n,k) = P(z_{n} = k)= \sum_{i} P(z_n = k |z_{n-1} = i)\times P(z_{n-1} = i)$$

During upward recursion, the flow of upward probabilities is calculated from leaf cells to the root cells generation by generation. For leaf cells, the probabilities ($\beta$) are calculated by:  
$$\beta(n,k) = P(z_n = k\;|X_n = x_n) = \frac{EL(n,k) \times MSD(n,k)}{NF_l(n)}$$

in which $X_n$ is the leaf cell's observation, and NF (Normalizing Factor) is an $N \times 1$ matrix that is the marginal observation distribution. Since $\sum_{k} \beta_n(k) = 1$, we find the NF for leaf cells using:  
$$NF_l(n) = \sum_{k} EL(n,k) \times MSD(n,k) = P(X_n = x_n)$$

For non-leaf cells the values are given by:  
$$ \beta(n,k) = P(z_n = k\;|\bar{X}_n = \bar{x}_n) = \frac{EL(n,k) \times MSD(n,k) \times \prod_{v \in c(n)}\beta_{n,v}(k)}{NF_{nl}(n)}$$

where we calculate the non-leaf NF using:  
$$NF_{nl}(n) = \sum_{k} \Big[EL(n,k) \times MSD(n,k) \prod_{v \in c(n)} \beta_{n,v}(k)\Big]$$

and linking $\beta$ between parent-daughter cells is given by:  
$$ \beta_{p(n), n}(k) = P(\bar{X}_n = \bar{x}_n | z_{p(n)} = k) = \sum_{j} \frac{\beta_n(j) \times T_{k,j}}{MSD(n,j)}$$

By recursing from leaf to root cells, the $\beta$ and NF matrices are calculated as upward recursion. The NF matrix gives a convenient expression for the log-likelihood of the observations. For each root cell we have:

$$P(\bar{X} = \bar{x}) = \prod_{n} \frac{P(\bar{X}_n = \bar{x}_n)}{\prod_{v\in c(n)} P(\bar{X}_v = \bar{x}_v)} = \sum_{n} NF(n) \qquad n \in \{1, ..., N\}$$

The overall model log-likelihood is given by the sum over root cells:

$$log P(\bar{X} = \bar{x}) = \sum_{n} log NF(n)$$

This quantity acts as the convergence measure of the EM algorithm.

##### Downward recursion

For computing _downward recursion_, we need the following definition for each root cells:

$$ \gamma_1(k) = P(z_1 = k | \bar{X}_1 = \bar{x}_1) = \beta_1(k)$$

The other cells follow in an $N \times K$ matrix by writing the conditional probabilities as the summation over the joint probabilities of parent-daughter cells:

$$\gamma_n(k) = P(z_n = k | \bar{X}_1 = \bar{x}_1) = \frac{\beta_n(k)}{MSD(n,k)} \sum_{i}\frac{T_{i,k} \gamma_{p(n)}(i)}{\beta_{p(n),n}(i)}$$

##### Viterbi algorithm

Given a sequence of observations in a hidden Markov chain, the Viterbi algorithm is commonly used to find the most likely sequence of states. Equivalently, here it returns the most likely sequence of states of the cells in a lineage tree using upward and downward recursion [@doi:10.1109/TSP.2004.832006].

Viterbi follows an upward recursion from leaf to root cells. We define $\delta$, an $N \times K$ matrix:

$$\delta (n,k) = \max\limits_{\bar{z}_{c(n)}}\{P(\bar{X}_n = \bar{x}_n, \bar{Z}_{c(n)} = \bar{z}_{c(n)} | z_n = j)\}$$

and the links between parent-daughter cells as:

$$\delta_{p(n),n}(k) = \max\limits_{\bar{z}_n} \{P(\bar{X}_n = \bar{x}_n, \bar{Z}_n = \bar{z}_n | z_{p(n)} = j)\} = \max\limits_{j}\{\delta(n,j) T_{k,j}\}$$

We initialize from the leaf cells as:

$$\delta(n,k) = P(X_n = x_n | z_n = k) = EL(n,k)$$

and for non-leaf cells use:

$$\delta(n,k) = \Big[\prod_{v \in c(n)} \delta_{n,v}(k)\Big]\times EL(n,k)$$

The probability of the optimal state tree corresponding to the observations tree, assuming root cell is noted as cell 1, is given by:

$$Z^* = \max\limits_{k}\{\delta(1,k) \pi_k \}$$

which arises from maximization over the conditional emission likelihood (EL) probabilities by factoring out the root cells as the outer maximizing step over all possible states.

#### M-step

In the M-step, we find the maximum likelihood of the parameters corresponding to the hidden Markov model. Here, we estimate $\theta = (\pi, T, p, a, s)$ the initial and transition probability matrices, the parameters of the observation distributions, i.e., division probability from the Bernoulli distribution, and shape, and scale parameters of the Gamma distribution. We do so by maximizing the joint probability of the observations and states given the parameters from the previous step; in other words $\theta^* = \max\limits_{\theta} P(Z, X|\theta)$ where $\theta$ refers to the parameters estimated in the previous step. We define a probability $\xi_n(j,k) = P(Z, X|\theta)$. According to Bayes theorem we can write that as $P(Z|X,\theta) \times P(X|\theta)$ and since $P(\bar{X}_1 = \bar{x}_1$ | \theta) is the emission likelihood probabilities of the whole tree, it is just a constant coefficient and we can ignore it. Writing $P(Z|X,\theta) as a joint probability, we have:
$$ \xi_n(j,k) = P(z_n = j, z_{p(n)} = k | \bar{X}_1 = \bar{x}_1)$$
which is equivalent to: 
$$ \xi_n(j,k) = \frac{\beta(n+1, k) \times T_{j,k} \times \gamma_j(n)}{MSD(n+1, k) \times \beta_{p(n),n}(j)}$$
The maximum likelihood estimation of the initial probabilities:  
$$ \pi^*_k = \gamma_1(k)$$
The transition probability matrix would be estimated as:  
$$ T^*_{i,j} = \frac{\sum_{n=1}^{N-1} \xi_n(i,j)}{\sum_{n=1}^{N-1} \gamma_n(i)} $$

To estimate the distribution parameters after finding the most likely state for each cell, we group them and group their observations based on their estimated state and calculate their maximum likelihood estimation. The experimental data includes measurements of cell fate and G1 and S/G2 phase lengths for lapatinib treatement with 25 nM, 100 nM, and 250 nM and for gemcitabine treatment with 5 nM, 10 nM, and 30 nM. By fitting the lineage data of each condition we would get a set of estimated parameters for the distribution of phase lengths and fate for each cell state. For estimating the Bernoulli parameter we simply find the sample mean of the observations for each state. Assuming we have $N_1$ data points estimated in state 1, the corresponding Bernoulli parameter for state 1 would be:

$$ p^*_1 = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N_1} x_b(i)}{N_1}$$

And for Gamma distribution parameters we use a closed-form estimation based on \cite{gamma_estimation} which has been corrected for bias:  
$$ a^* = \frac{N_1 \times  \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} x_g(i)}{\Big[N_1 \times \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} x_g(i) ln(x_g(i))\Big] - \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} ln(x_g(i)) \times \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} x_g(i)} $$
$$ s^* = \frac{1}{N_1^2} \times \Big[N_1 \times \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} x_g(i) ln(x_g(i)) - \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} ln(x_g(i)) \times \sum_{i=1}^{N_1} x_g(i) \Big]$$

The shape and scale parameter from the gamma-distributed phase lengths are representations of the number of and the progression rate through the sub-phases, and since all the data is collected from one specific cell line, we assumed the number of sub-phases do not change from one condition to another. Hence, to look at the pattern of parameter change across different conditions, we decided to fit all the conditions simultaneously instead of one by one, to fix the shape parameter across different conditions. On the other hand, the pattern by which cells respond to a drug treatment, should be monotonic by increasing the drug concentration. For instance, we except to have a decreasing progression rate through G1 phase from control condition to 25 nM, to 100 nM, to 250 nM of lapatinib treatment. To apply this assumption, we forced the scale parameters in both phases to be in a decreasing order across different conditions when all the conditions are being fitted at once. For that, we used linear constrained fitting using "trust-constr" method in scipy.optimize package in Python.

### Synthetic lineage data

We generated synthetic lineage trees with $K$ discrete states and $N$ total number of cells for benchmarking. Lineages were composed of two primary data structures, the state and emissions trees. The state tree was randomly seeded with a root cell determined by the starting probabilities, then expanded by randomly sampling transitions based on the transition probability matrix. After creating the state tree with the desired number of cells, the emission tree is built upon it. Emissions were randomly sampled from the distributions for each cell’s state. Finally, the effects of the emissions were applied to the tree when necessary. If any cells died, their progeny were marked as unobserved by making their emissions NaN values. If applicable, the effects of finite-duration experiments were also applied. Cells existed outside of the experiment duration were similarly marked as unobserved, and those crossing the bounds of an experiment were marked as censored.

### Experimental single-cell lineage data

The data includes AU565 breast cancer cell line for control condition along with 7 concentrations of 2 types of targeted or chemotherapy compounds including lapatinib and gemcitabine. A fluorescent reporter was developed to translocate between the nucleus and cytoplasm to indicate the phase of the cells. Each cell is indicated as being in G1 or S/G2 phase according to the location of the reporter. When the reporter is located in the nucleus it means the cell is in G1 and when the reporter in the cytoplasm, the cell is passing through S/G2 phase. Each experiment lasts for 96 hours where the plates were being imaged every 30 minutes and each experiment was repeated three times. Single cells were manually tracked to collect cell fate in either phase or the amount of time it takes for each cell to pass through G1 and S/G2 phases.

#### Strategies to overcome model fitting to censored data

In single-cell experimental data collection, the lineages are almost never fully observed, in other words, we experience missing data for cells with time or fate censorship. Those leaf cells living at the end of the collected lineage trees, which may have been in their G1 or S/G2 exactly when the experiment was finished, experience a right-censorship, meaning, we have missing data from the future. For a cell that was in G1 at the end of the experiment, the time that the cell transitions to S/G2 is unknown, hence the cell's G1 is censored. In a similar way, almost all of the root cells appearing at the very beginning of the experiment are left-censored. This way, given a population of cells, we identify whether any of the cell's observations are censored or not. The uncensored values are passed to the estimator while the censored values will be handled by the survivor function. 
Another similar challenge is the unobserved measurements when cells die and their descendants disappear or when a leaf cell reaches the experiment end time while it is in the G1 phase such that the S/G2 phase for this cell is unobserved. We simply remove those measurements that have not been observed at all.

### Model evaluation

In this part we briefly mention the measures we used to quantify the model goodness-of-fit.

To find the most likely number of states corresponding to the observations, Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) is used [@doi:10.1006/jmps.1999.1276]. Degrees of freedom: Our model estimate a $k \times 1$ initial probability matrix, a $k \times k$ transition matrix, and a $k \times m$ matrix of state-wise parameters where $k$ is the number of states and $m$ is the number of parameters associated with observation distributions. For the phase-specific observation sets we have a total of 6 parameters including 2 Bernoulli parameters and 2 pairs of shape and scale parameters for Gamma distribution. Since the row-sums for transition and initial probability matrices must be 1, these values are not independent.

From distribution analysis of the phase lengths, we realized the shape parameter of the Gamma distribution remains fairly constant over different conditions, while the scale parameter changes. Removing the shape parameters of G1 and S/G2 for each states, instead of $k \times (k - 1) + (k - 1) + k \times (m)$ degrees of freedom, we will have $k \times (k - 1) + (k - 1) + k \times (m-2)$.
 
The Wasserstein or Kantorovich–Rubinstein metric is a measure of distance between two distributions. This metric was used to determine the difference between state emissions [@doi:10.1137/1118101]. An analytical solution, the absolute value of the difference in distribution means, was used for the Gamma distribution.

### Model benchmarking

In this model, we use multivariate emission distributions to represent the physical characteristics of the cells within the lineages. To create our synthetic data we considered two possible options as our set of observations throughout an experiment. First, cell fate and cell lifetime, and second, phase-specific fate and time duration, for which we used Bernoulli and Gamma distributions. For the consistency of our model, we set a specific set of parameters for those mentioned distributions in each case. The following is the collection of distribution parameters for two-state synthetic data.

#### Phase non-specific observations
The parameters are reflective of fitting the model to data of 5 nM lapatinib treatment. Figures @fig:prop4, @fig:real_5, @fig:performUncenSingle, @fig:performUncenMulti, and @fig:performCenMulti are based on these parameters.

| State | Bern p | Shape | Scale |
| :---: |  :---: | :---: | :---: |
|State 1 | 0.99 | 8 | 6 |
| State 2 | 0.75 | 8 | 1 |


#### Phase-specific observations

The data in Figures @fig:censor, @fig:performSyn, @fig:uncenSingle, @fig:uncenMulti, and @fig:cenMulti was created based on the following parameters. These parameters are based on estimations from AU565 cells treated with 5 nM lapatinib.

| State | Bern $G_1$ | Bern $G_2$ | Shape $G_1$ | Scale $G_1$ | Shape $G_2$ | Scale $G_2$ |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | 
| State 1 | 0.99 | 0.95 | 8 | 7 | 4 | 2 |
|State 2 | 0.95 | 0.9 | 6 | 4 | 3 | 5 |

#### Distant emissions

To create synthetic data with subpopulations of varying dissimilarity (Fig. @fig:wass), we use the phase-specific parameters set except that the values for the G1 phase Gamma shape parameter for state 1 is varied between $[4, 12]$. This results in an increase in the Wasserstein distance between the two cell states, allowing us to measure state assignment accuracy for different dissimilarity amounts between the two states. Likewise, for Figures @fig:wass1 and @fig:wass2, we simulated the overall cell lifetime duration and varied the Gamma distribution scale parameter from 1 to 8 for state 1.

#### Emissions for AIC figures

Figure @fig:sAIC uses a unique set of values for the emissions matrix in order to simulate varying states for the AIC calculation. 


| State | Bern $G_1$ | Bern $G_2$ | Shape $G_1$ | Scale $G_1$ | Shape $G_2$ | Scale $G_2$ |
:---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | 
| State 1 | 0.99 | 0.9 | 10 | 2 | 10 | 2 |
|State 2 | 0.9 | 0.9 | 20 | 3 | 20 | 3 |
| State 3 | 0.85 | 0.9 | 30 | 4 | 30 | 4 |
| State 4 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 40 | 4 | 40 | 5 |
