## Supplementary Figures

<!-- (Supp. Figure 1) -->
### Performance on uncensored single lineage of increasing size

![**Performance on uncensored single lineages of increasing size.** (a)Visual representation of cells increasing lineage size with varying states. (b) Bernoulli parameter approaches the true value as number of cells increase for states 1 and 2. (c) Gamma shape parameter approaches the true value consistently for states 1 and 2. (d) Gamma scale parameter approaches the true value consistently for state 1 and as the number of cells increase for state 2. (e) State assignment accuracy approaches 100% as number of cells increase. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as number of cells increase. ](./output/figureS01.svg){#fig:uncenSingle}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure 2) -->
### Performance on uncensored multiple lineages of increasing size

![**Performance on uncensored populations of lineages of increasing number.** (a) Visualization of cells increasing in size and number of lineages. (b) Bernoulli parameter approaches the true value consistently for states 1 and 2. (c) Gamma shape parameter approaches the true value as number of cells increase for states 1 and 2. (d) Gamma scale parameter approaches the true value consistently for states 1 and 2. (e) State assignment accuracy approaches 100% consistently. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as number of cells increase. (g) Errors in estimating the initial probability matrix, π, approaches 0 as number of cells increase. ](./output/figureS02.svg){#fig:uncenMulti}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure 3) -->
### Performance on censored multiple lineages of increasing size

![**Performance on censored multiple lineages of increasing size.** (a) Visualization of cells increasing in size and number of censored lineages. (b) Bernoulli parameter approaches the true value for state 1 as number of cells increase and approaches the true value between 100 to 200 cells and deviates for larger lineages for state 2. (c) Gamma shape parameter approaches the true value as number of cells increase for states 1 and 2. (d) Gamma scale parameter approaches the true value consistently for state 2 and as the number of cells increase for state 1. (e) State assignment accuracy approaches 100% consistently. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as number of cells increase and then increases past 200 cells. (g) Errors in estimating the initial probability matrix, π, approaches 0 as number of cells increase. ](./output/figureS03.svg){#fig:cenMulti}

\pagebreak

<!-- # (Supp. Figure 4) -->
### Change in model performance when varying presence of a state for uncensored population

![**Model performance relative to the presence of each state in uncensored lineages.** (a) Visualization of the distribition of cells in the lineage transitioning from state 1 to state 2. (b) Bernoulli parameter approaches the true value when 40-80% of cells are in state 1 and deviates at other percentages for states 1 and 2. (c) Gamma shape parameter approaches the true value then deviates when over 60% of cells are in state 1 for states 1 and 2. (d) Gamma scale parameter approaches the true value consistently for states 1 and 2. (e) State assignment accuracy decreases as the percent of cells in State 1 increases. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 when 40-75% of cells are in state 1 and increases at other percentages for states 1 and 2. ](./output/figureS04.svg){#fig:prop4}

<!-- (Supp. Figure 5) -->
### Change in model performance when varying presence of a state for censored population 

![**Performance on populations of censored lineages of increasing number.** (a) Visualization of the proportion of cells in the censored lineage transitioning from state 1 to state 2. (b) Bernoulli parameter deviates from the true value as percent of cells in state 1 increases for state 1 and approaches the true value when the percent of cells in state 1 is above 40% for states 1. (c)-(d) Gamma shape and scale parameters approach the true value then deviates when over 80% of cells are in state 1 for states 1 and 2. (e) State assignment accuracy decreases as the percent of cells in State 1 increases. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 when 40-75% of cells are in state 1 and increases at other percentages for states 1 and 2.](./output/figureS05.svg){#fig:real_5}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure 6) -->
### Change in model performance when varying state distribution similarity for uncensored populations

![**Change in model performance when varying state distribution similarity with uncensored population of lineages.** (a) Visualization of the Wasserstein Divergence increasing as the state distribution in the lineage varies. (b) Bernoulli parameter consistently approaches the true value as the Wasserstein Divergence increases. (c) Gamma shape parameter deviates from the true value as the Wasserstein Divergence exceeds 20. (d) Gamma scale parameter consistently approaches the true value as the Wasserstein Divergence increases. (e) State Assignment Accuracy approaches 100% as the Wasserstein Divergence increases. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as the Wasserstein Divergence increases.](./output/figureS06.svg){#fig:wass1}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure 7) -->
### Change in model performance when varying state distribution similarity for censored population

![**Change in model performance when varying state distribution similarity with censored lineages.** (a) Visualization of the Wasserstein Divergence increasing as the state distribution in the censored lineage varies. (b)-(d) Bernoulli, Gamma shape, and Gamma scale parameters consistently approach the true value as the Wasserstein Divergence increases. (e) State Assignment Accuracy approaches 100% as the Wasserstein Divergence increases. (f) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as the Wasserstein Divergence increases.](./output/figureS07.svg){#fig:wass2}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure 8) -->
### Performance on uncensored single lineage of increasing size given phase specific observations

![**Performance on uncensored single lineages of increasing size.** (a) Visualization of a single lineage increasing in size. (b) Bernoulli parameter consistently approaches the true value for state 1 and approaches the true value for state 2 as the number of cells increase in the G1 phase. (c) Gamma shape parameter consistently approaches the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G1 phase. (d) Gamma scale parameter approaches the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G1 phase. (e) Bernoulli parameter approaches the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G2 phase. (f) Gamma shape parameter consistently approaches the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G2 phase. (g) Gamma scale parameter approaches the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G2 phase. (h) State assignment accuracy approaches 100% as the number of cells increase. (i) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as the number of cells increase.](./output/figureS08.svg){#fig:performUncenSingle}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure 9) -->
### Performance on uncensored lineages of increasing number given phase specific observations

![**Performance on uncensored populations of lineages of increasing number.** (a) Visualization of the number of uncensored lineages within a population increasing. (b)-(d) The Bernoulli, Gamma shape, and Gamma scale parameter approaching the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G1 phase. (e)-(g) The Bernoulli, Gamma shape, and Gamma scale parameter approaching the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G2 phase. (h) The state assignment accuracy approaches 95% approximately as the number of cells increase. (i) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as the number of cells increase. (j) Errors in estimating the initial probability matrix, π, approaches 0 as number of cells increase.](./output/figureS09.svg){#fig:performUncenMulti}

\pagebreak

<!-- (Supp. Figure10) -->
### Performance on censored multiple lineages of increasing size given phase specific observations

![**Performance on censored multiple lineages of increasing size.** (a) Visualization of the number of censored lineages within a population increasing. (b)-(d) The Bernoulli, Gamma shape, and Gamma scale parameter approaching the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G1 phase. (e)-(g) The Bernoulli, Gamma shape, and Gamma scale parameter approaching the true value for states 1 and 2 as the number of cells increase in the G2 phase. (h) The state assignment accuracy approaches 95% approximately as the number of cells increases. (i) Errors in estimating the transition probability matrix, T, approaches 0 as the number of cells increases. (j) Errors in estimating the initial probability matrix, π, approaches 0 as number of cells increase.](./output/figureS10.svg){#fig:performCenMulti}
