# Conclusions

In this work we present a machine learning pipeline, the tHMM, that can analyze tree-structured data using any measurements from the parent and daughter nodes. In particular, we apply our algorithm to a cell imaging protocol that inputs cell fate and lifetime into the tHMM pipeline and can be used with time-lapsed images for real-time classification. The tHMM is able to construct and analyze cell lineage trees to properly assign cells to different states based on solely two phenotypic properties of cell fitness, and also quantify the likelihood of transitioning to a different state using emissions and the transition rate matrix. The current version of this pipeline is most accurate when populations consist of at least 50 cells per lineage. We are working on making this model estimate hidden states for lineages that are much smaller, and with additional cell markers as emissions. Cell transitions from therapy-susceptible to therapy-resistant states are well detected by the model, which will prove useful for identifying mutant subtypes in tumors and leading to more optimal therapies for cancer treatment. The tHMM may further be used for drug screening as a single-cell, rather than population-based, means of quantifying potency of novel therapies in eliminating all subpopulations within a tumor. The pipeline will provide researchers and clinicians with improved classification of heterogeneity among cells, or any other tree-structured data, and provide information about latent changes in cellular identity.